---
layout: post
title: "Professional Self-Assessment"
---

Contained in these pages is some hard evidence of the work that I have done in the past creating web apps and how I have enhanced and improved upon them over time. With this ePortfolio, I would like to walk you through what makes me an excellent choice as a software engineer, with a focus in full stack webapp development.

My schooling at SNHU has given me experience working in a team environment. It has taught me how to use Git to collaborate with my peers and maintain local and remote repositories. I can also use docker and docker compose to help streamline some of the development and onboarding process by being able to share development environments and containers for myself or others also using docker. Beyond the use of these tools, you will see that I also explain my code as cleanly as possible with inline comments and doc strings as needed in the code. This helps any peers working with me or maintaining the code base later to easily jump in and understand what’s happening. All these principles are shown in the code artifacts provided in this portfolio.

Strategies I’ve learned here at SNHU like those listed above help me work with the team, but I also can be clear and concise with my words and able to communicate with my peers and clients as well. Because I can clearly conceptualize the workings of an application, I am also able to communicate those details to clients who are not as technically inclined. In my narratives for my code enhancements later you will see how I explain the details of each improvement in a technical way that is still easy to understand. 

Along with being able to communicate these technical details in an enlightened way, my technical abilities as an engineer are well shown in the artifacts. In the application I created, you can see advanced programming design principles where the application is broken down into more modular components lending to more reusable code. The implementation of the webapp that I created is fairly broad as well and could easily be retooled for a new client. 

I show off some of my more advanced programming techniques in my application as well. Many processes required detailed understanding of the data that is held and used by the application as well as the algorithms best suited to carry out the functionality that feels natural to the user. Beyond this we can see I work to be as efficient as possible, avoiding unnecessary overhead when possible. 

Working with databases is something that I’ve also learned a lot about during my schooling. Here I show off some of my skills with PostgreSQL, but I also have understanding of the basic concepts of SQL so I’m able to work with many other database engines or paradigms. Not only am I able to understand some basic concepts of SQL in general, but I also know the advanced concepts like using an ORM from another language like JavaScript or Python which can help with database security and help prevent SQL injection attacks.

Through much of my schoolwork I also learned a lot about security measures and how to best try to prevent malicious uses or attacks on the software I develop and the systems I work with. As described in further detail below, you can see that I take steps to prevent access to some administrative functions of the website and have a security layer preventing that access. Understanding how to implement layers like this in a way that also protects users’ data like their password by hashing them properly is imperative. 

The artifact that I've put together for this portfolio is built using all of the ideas above and showcases my abilities as a software engineer. I have chosen to showcase just one artifact that contains all these aspects and demonstrate them by recreating a full stack web application, ‘Travlr’, a travel agency website. It models a project from a previous class but is rebuilt completely from the ground up using completely different programming languages than originally used as well as a different database engine. Not only did I build a comparable version of the application using the new stack, but I also enhanced much of it by creating a better security layer, adding functionality to the administrative side to it, and fixing any missing but expected functionality. 

Along with the technical improvements I made while recreating ‘Travlr’, I also reduced the codebase by quite a large margin by using Python. This can improve maintainability and its extensibility in the long run. Side by side, with even my added functionality, the code base is less than half the size; if we included the whole package it is less than a tenth of the size. The technical aspects to look for are that this was built using Python and the Flask web framework backed with a PostgreSQL database instead of the MEAN JavaScript stack used previously. I also used Bootstrap for all the front-end styling and was able do it without using any additional JavaScript. While this serves as a brief overview of the technical artifacts provided in the ePortfolio, the narrative for the development process goes into much more detail about the specifics of each part of the enhancement process and the technical aspects of each. 
